---
layout: page
title: 3. Norms
---

# 3. Norms

A norm is how we measure the length/size of vectors and matrices.

 

$$
\| . \|: V\to \R\quad  (V \subset \R^n).
$$

An example is relative error:

$$
\frac{\|x-y\|}{\|x\|}.
$$

$\|.\|$ is a norm if

1. $\|x\| \geq 0$, $\|x\| = 0 \iff x=0$.
2. $\| \alpha x\|= \|\alpha\| \|x\|$
3. $\|x+y\| \leq \|x\| + \|y\|$. Sub-additivity / triangle inequality.

## Common Vector Norms

The infinity norm is the maximum value of a vector

$$
\|\vec x\|_\infty =\max_i|x_i|.
$$

This is very punishing of outliers.

The 1 norm is the sum of the absolute values

$$
\|x\|_1 = \sum_{i=0}^n|x_i|.
$$

The 2 norm is the square root of sum the squares. 

These are all examples of $p$-norms, which are given by 

$$
\Bigg(\sum|x_i|\Bigg)^{1/p}.
$$

The limit is what happens when $p\to \infty$.

## Isometries

Isometries are operations that do not change the norms. 

- Permutations
    - $\|Px\|_p =\|x\|_p$.
- Orthogonal matrices
    - $\|Qx\|_2^2 = x^TQ^TQx = x^Tx = \|x\|_2^2$.

## Norm Equivalence

Given two norms $\|x\|_a$ and $\|x\|_b$, there is a theorem that $\exists$ constants $c_1, c_2$ such that

$$
c_1\|x\|_b \leq \|x\|_a \leq c_2\|x\|_b.
$$

**Example.** The infinity norm is less than the 1 norm less than $n$ times the infinity norm.

$$
\max_i|x_i| \leq \sum_{i=0}^n|x_i|\leq n \max_i|x_i|.
$$

Note that they are equivalent when $x$ has exactly 1 non-zero element or all the entries are 0.

## Matrix Norms

Suppose $A \in \R^{m\times n}$. The Frobenius norm is treating a matrix as a $mn$ dimension vector and taking the 2-norm.

We can also calculate the induced norm, or operator norm.

$$
\|A\|_p = \sup_{\|x\|_p = 1} {\|Ax\|_p}.
$$

See [2.9. Superconvergence](/coursework/2-9-superconvergence-62fb465fde5f4cdfb5a2d7e21dcbc8bb).

A nice property of induced norms is that they are subordinate and submultiplicative. See Cauchy-Schwarz. [1.4. Geometry of the real numbers](/coursework/1-4-geometry-of-the-real-numbers-af3ccd89c2b54c44863617e9e0158657). 

$$
\|Av\|\leq \|A\|\|v\|.\\
\|AB\|\leq \|A\|\|B\|.
$$

This is not a property of all norms. For example, suppose we want ot take the max norm 

$$
\Bigg\|\begin{bmatrix}2&2\\0&0\end{bmatrix}\begin{bmatrix}1&0\\1&0\end{bmatrix}\Bigg \|_{max} = 4.
$$

### Matrix Isometries

Suppose $M_1$ and $M_2$ are permutation matrices.

$$
\|M_1AM_2\|_p = \max_{\|x\|=1}\|M_1AM_2x\|_p.
$$

This property also holds for frobenius norms.

### Matrix 2-norm (spectral norm)

Suppose we have $\|A\|^2\_2=\max_{\|x\|_1} \|Ax\|^2_2 = x^TA^TAx$.

$A^TA$ is a symmetric matrix, so it has a full set of orthonormal vectors for its eigenvalues.

$A^TA = V\Lambda V^T$ where $V^TV = I$.

$\|A\|\_2 = \sqrt{\lambda_{max} (A^TA)}$.

---
